# DOM

## Document Object Moddel
> It consist of DOM tree, having various **node** and each node have few relations with each other.
>- The top node is called the root. It does not have any parents. 
>- Every other node in the tree belongs to one parent. 
>- Every node may have several children. 
>- Nodes with the same parent are referred to as siblings. 

## DOM API Properties

**parentNodes**

>Returns a Node object that is the parent node of the specified node. This property can be retrieved and cannot set it. 
```javascript
    document.body.parentNode; 
    // return node object <html>
```

**childNodes**

>- Returns NodeList object, i.e collection of child nodes of the specified node. 
>- Each child can be accessed by an index number that refers to its position inside the parent element. The first position is at index '0'.
```javascript
    document.body.childNodes
```

**firstChild**

>- Returns Node object which is the first child of the specified node. 
>- Its is equivalent to childNodes[0].
```javascript
    document.getElementById("div1").firstChild
```
**lastChild**
>Returns Node object which is the last child of the specified node.
```javascript
    document.getElementById("div").lastChild
```
**nextSibling** 
>returns the Node object of the node that immediately follows the specified node at the same tree level. 
```javascript
    let elem=document.getElementById("heading1").nextSibling;
    console.log(elem);
```
**previousSibling** 
>Returns the Node object of the node that the previous node of the specified node at the same tree level.

> **Please note:** 
>- Similar to all these properties of Node object, you also have properties such as **parentElement, firstElementChild, lastElementChild, nextElementSibling and previousElementSibling**.
>- The difference is that element properties return only the Element object whereas node properties return element, text, and attribute nodes with respect to the specified node. Also, whitespaces are considered as '#text' nodes by the node properties. 

## Node Manipulation

>- Create a new element 
>- Create new content 
>- Add new content to the new element 
>- Add a new element to the existing DOM tree 

### createElement()

>Creates a new element.<br> 
>Example: 
```javascript
    let newElement = document.createElement('span'); 
```
### createTextNode() 

>Creates content at runtime. This node then can be appended to any node that can hold content.<br> 
Example: 
```javascript
    let newTextElement = document.createTextNode('The span is added just now')
```
### appendChild() 

>Appends a newly created element to the existing DOM tree at the desired position.<br>
Example: 
```javascript
    newElement.appendChild(newTextElement);
    document.getElementById('div1').appendChild(newElement);
```

### removeChild() 
>Removes the element from the existing DOM tree. <br>
Example: 
```javascript
    document.getElementById('div1').removeChild(document.getElementById('para1')); 
```
## DOM Event Handling

>DOM API provides couple of ways to handle events in JavaScript using internal or external scripting. It segregates HTML elements completely from any JavaScript code. There are two different ways of doing this. 
```javascript
    document.getElementById('para1').onclick=function(){ 
            alert('Para one clicked'); 
    } 
    //OR   
    document.getElementById('para2').addEventListener('click', function(){ 
            alert('Para two clicked');} 
    ,false); 
```

## Event Object

>- Events in JavaScript are considered as objects. 
>- When events are fired, the 'event' object is generated by the browser. This object encapsulates all data related to that event. 
>- To access or manipulate this object, it can optionally be passed as the first argument to the event handler function. 

>The properties of this object are as follows: 
>- target
>- type

```javascript
    <p id="para1" onclick="executeMe(event)"> Para one of my page</p> 
    <script> 
         function executeMe(event) {
                alert(event.target.nodeName)
            }
    </script> 
    //alert box shows P ID="PARA1" 
```

**type Event Property:**

>Tells the type of events that have taken place like click, load, etc. 

```javascript
    <p id="para1" onclick="executeMe(event)"> Para one of my page</p> 
    <script> 
       function executeMe(event) {
                alert(event.type)
            }
    </script> 
    //alert box shows click
```

### Methods: 

**preventDefault()**

>- Cancels default action associated with HTML element and adds user-defined action  (if required). 
>- For example, an element’s default action is to navigate to the given link. That action can be cancelled and some other action can be done instead.
 
```javascript
    event.preventDefault();
```